Distributed DNS (RFC 0008) (#55)
Kuadrant/architecture: rfcs/0008-leaderless-dns.md

# Leaderless DNS Load Balancing

> - Feature Name: Leaderless DNS Load Balancing

Reviewer: prob should change this also?

- Start Date: 2024-01-17
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55)
- Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0000](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Enable the MGC to manage DNS for one or more hostnames shared across one or more clusters, where a central "hub" cluster is not required or may not be available, and increase the robustness of the DNS Health checks by executing them from all the available clusters.

Reviewer: prob should rename this to `DNS Operator`?

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Currently, the MGC has limited functionality for a single cluster, or for multiple clusters without OCM. Having the MGC enabled to manage DNS in these situations significantly eases onboarding users to the advantages of the MGC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the DNS record controller has limited functionality for a single cluster, or for multiple clusters without OCM. Having the DNSRecord controller enabled to manage DNS in these situations significantly eases onboarding users to the advantages of the DNSRecord controller.
```

# Diagrams
[diagrams]: #diagrams

- [Overview](./0008-leaderless-dns-assets/leaderless-dns-usecases.jpg)
- [P2P Health Checks](./0008-leaderless-dns-assets/leaderless-dns-healthchecks.jpg)
- [DNS Pruning](./0008-leaderless-dns-assets/leaderless-dns-pruning.jpg)
- [DNS Controller](./0008-leaderless-dns-assets/leaderless-dns-dns-operator.jpg)

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Single Cluster

> In a single cluster scenario, create a DNS Policy that references a DNS provider. When a matching host on a gateway is found to be in use, the IP addresses of that gateway will be created as A records for that host in the Zone file following the configuration outlined in the DNS Policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a single cluster scenario, create a DNS Policy that references a DNS provider. When a listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider, the addresses of that gateway will be created as A or CNAME records for that host in the appropriate zone file following the configuration outlined in the DNS Policy.
```

### Single Cluster Health Checks
If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will also be created and used to remove unhealthy IPs from the Zone file, should all health checks fail, then all A records will be published to avoid an NXDOMAIN response.

## Multiple Cluster

> In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret that specifies a unique `clusterID`, they should all reference the same zone(s) in the same DNS Provider for the same host. In each cluster, when a matching host on a gateway is found to be in use, the IP addresses of that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways IP addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret that specifies a unique `clusterID`, they should all reference the same zone(s) in the same DNS Provider for the same host. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.
```

Reviewer: Is it fair to say, that the host is the key here? If you had two gateways with 4 hosts but only one of those was shared across clusters then 3 of the hosts would be acted on as a dedicated host and 1 of the hosts as a shared host?

### Multiple Cluster Health Checks
If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will be created on all clusters, there are then 2 types of health checks:

> 1) Local Health Checks - used to check this clusters IP addresses are responding for the expected host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) Local Health Checks - used to check the local gateway's IP addresses are responding for the expected host.
```

2) Remote Health Checks - used to check that the other IP addresses in the zone file are responding for that zones host.

> When a local health check is failing, this IP will not be published to the zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a local health check is failing, this IP will not be published to the zone. If it has already been published it will be removed only if there is more than one available address
```

Reviewer: In the case of a  host instead of an IP is it fair to say that in this brief CNAME address and IP address are interchangeable ?

Author: yes, exactly

> When a remote health check is failing a TXT record is added/amended in the zone to note the failure - should the percentage of failing clusters exceed the `MultiClusterFailureThreshold` (configured in the DNS Policy), that unhealthy IP is removed from the zone by any cluster with an unhealthy check on that IP.

Reviewer: could we add an example of the txt record. It would be important not to have sensitive information in this record

Author: yes, we will hash the clusterIDs when using them in the Zone.

Reviewer: Can we add an example of the TXT record?

Author: I have added it, it's in the Remote Health Check Failing section.

If all local and remote health checks for a particular host are marked as unhealthy, all known IPs are published, to avoid an NXDOMAIN response.

## OCM / ACM
This is very similar to a single cluster, with the caveat that the "single" cluster is the hub cluster for this OCM. The primary difference is that the gateway will be a Kuadrant gatewayClass.

### OCM / ACM Health Checks
This is also the same as single cluster.

> ## Migrating from Single cluster to Multiple cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating from Single cluster to Multiple cluster without OCM
```

In the single cluster: 
- Edit all relevant provider secrets and set:

>   - `ClusterID` to some unique value

Reviewer: when setting up the provider secret, empty is the default, but is there anything to say I shouldn't set an id if I want ? What would be the impact if I set an id in a single cluster?

Author: > when setting up the provider secret, empty is the default, but is there anything to say I shouldn't set an id if I want ? What would be the impact if I set an id in a single cluster?

If you set a clusterID in a single cluster, it would start to act with the zone as the authority (i.e. assuming other clusters are/will be interacting with the zone as well).

In the additional clusters:

> - Copy the DNS Policies and provider secrets from the single cluster to any additional clusters, and update the provider secrets with unique `ClusterID` values.

Reviewer: initially I was a bit worried about this actually and if it would cause issues for git ops. But I think it is fine https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/operator-manual/applicationset/Generators-Cluster/ more of a FYI than anything

- (optional) Create a gateway and workload which uses the same hosts as the single cluster.

## Migrating from single/multiple clusters to OCM

This is not covered.

## Cleanup

Cleanup of a cluster's zone file entries is triggered by deleting the DNS Policy that caused the DNS Records to be created.

The DNS policy will have a finalizer, when it is deleted the controller will mark the created DNS Records for deletion.

The DNS Records will have a finalizer from the DNS Operator which will clean the records from the zone before removing the finalizer.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## General Logic Overview

> The general flow for DNS Records follows a single path in the Kuadrant operator, where it will always output a DNS Record which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of leaderless DNS, or phrased more simply:

Reviewer: should this be DNS Policy rather than record? Kuadrant operator will reconcile DNS Policy into dns records

Build a DNS Record (kuadrantRecord) based on the local gateways and DNS Policy.

> This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, where there are 2 possible routes:

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing. What is a kuadrant record? Probably needs to be introduced as concept first?

> Where a clusterID is specified in the relevant ProviderSecret the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone as the authority and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to it's cluster are accurate, when cleaning up a DNS Record in this scenario the operator will ensure all records for the local cluster are removed and then prune unresolvable records from the DNS Provider zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where a clusterID is specified in the relevant ProviderSecret the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone as the authority and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are accurate, when cleaning up a DNS Record in this scenario the operator will ensure all records for the local cluster are removed and then prune unresolvable records from the DNS Provider zone.
```

Reviewer: yeah ok so from reading this it seems it will be fine to set a cluster id even for a single cluster?

Reviewer: question would it be possible for the controller to identify a clash of clusterids and report it as an error?

Author: > question would it be possible for the controller to identify a clash of clusterids and report it as an error?

that's a pretty interesting question. I don't think so, as the A records with a local ID and different IPs could be the local cluster's old IP addresses that need to be updated.

> Where a clusterID is not specified the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Record as the authority and ensure the entire host is updated in the zone to exactly match the specified DNS Record when cleaning up in this scenario, the host is fully removed from the DNS Provider zone.

Reviewer: ok so removing a cluster id once one has been set would effectively declare this to be standalone. Hmm this is actually making me think that we always just require a cluster id to be set in the provider secret. I know we talked about it before but reading it again here, it seems there is very little draw back to requiring this.

Reviewer: Other option is we rename it so it is more explicitly multi-cluster
IE `clusterID -> multiClusterID`

### API Updates
New configuration options in the providerSecret:
- `ClusterID`
  - When absent the DNS Operator will consider itself the owner of the zone and the local DNS Records as the authority.
  - When present the DNS Operator will consider the zone the authority and only insert/update any missing records from the local DNS Records.
  - This can only be alphanumeric and have no whitespace, and is case-insensitive
  - Used when generating an A record, e.g. `<hash>-<clusterID>.<lb-id>.<host...>`
- `RefreshInterval`
  - When absent it defaults to the shortest TTL of created records. This is how often in seconds to reconcile the DNS Policy in order to pull fresh zone values from the DNS Provider.

New fields added to the DNS Policy CRD: 
- `HealthCheck.MultiClusterFailureThreshold`

>   - When absent defaults to `1`, what percentage of clusters need to be reporting an endpoint unhealthy on a remote IP for it to be removed from the zone by a cluster that does not own that IP.

Reviewer: why 1? 1% of clusters is the default. seems odd

New fields added to the DNS Record CRD:
- `HealthCheck`
  - Propagated from the DNS Policy, to facilitate reconciling health checks in the DNS controller.
- `ProviderSecret`
  - Propagated from the DNS Policy to facilitate pulling the zone in the DNS controller.

### Changes to DNS Policy reconciler

This will primarily need to be made aware of the new fields on the DNS Policy (Healthcheck block and providerSecret field) that it will need to propagate into any DNS Records that it creates or updates. Otherwise the logic of this controller remains largely the same.

### DNS Operator

A new component that will deal with taking the DNS Records output by the DNSPolicy reconciler and ensure they are accurately reflected in the DNS Provider zone.

This component should already exist, but in a fashion that assumes the DNS Record as the source of truth and always ensures that the zone matches the local DNS Record CR.

There are several changes required in this component:

#### Build DNS Records from the provider zone

> When the DNS Operator reconciles a DNS Record (kuadrantRecord) it will first look to the referenced providerSecret to see if a ClusterID is set, if so the operator will first pull the most recent records from the DNS Provider and construct a separate DNS Record which accurately reflects the state of the zone in the provider (zoneRecord).

Reviewer: kuadrant record is a bit confusing, as above

Author: I'm just trying to differentiate between the DNS Record created by Kuadrant and the DNS Record created by the DNS Operator, they are still both instances of the same DNSRecord CRD.

If the DNS Operator already has zoneRecords it will first execute a GET request for the `kuadrant.last_modified_at` TXT record, if the value of that field is more recent than the zoneRecords lastModified time, then the DNS Operator will list and rebuild it's zoneRecords.

#### Ensure local records are accurate

Once the zoneRecord is created / updated on cluster, the operator will then scan through this DNS Record and remove any records that contain the local clusterID stored in the status of the DNS Record (more info on this later). Then inject the values from the kuadrantRecord into the zoneRecord. After this the DNS Operator will sanity check the result and prune any bad records (we will expand on that later). Once the zoneRecord is updated and sanity checked, if it has changed then the result is sent back to the DNS Provider so that the zone can be updated and made accurate (with an added update to the (`kuadrant.last_modified_at`) TXT record.

#### Update response to failing health check 

When a health check fails, there are 2 scenarios that need to be considered:

##### Local Health Check Failing

> In this scenario, the cluster will immediately remove the IP from the DNS Record, as it is a local workload that is not functional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, the cluster will immediately remove the IP from the DNS Record unless it is the only remaining IP, as it is a local workload that is not functional.
```

# Distributed DNS Load Balancing

- Feature Name: Distributed DNS Load Balancing
- Start Date: 2024-01-17
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55)

> - Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0000](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/0000)

Reviewer: Might be good to add an issue to the arch repo that is for `Distributed DNS` and link to the two epics we created yesterday

# Diagrams
[diagrams]: #diagrams

- [Overview](./0008-distributed-dns-assets/distributed-dns-usecases.jpg)
- [P2P Health Checks](./0008-distributed-dns-assets/distributed-dns-healthchecks.jpg)
- [DNS Pruning](./0008-distributed-dns-assets/distributed-dns-pruning.jpg)
- [DNS Controller](./0008-distributed-dns-assets/distributed-dns-dns-operator.jpg)

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Single Cluster
In a single cluster scenario, create a DNS Policy that references a DNS provider. When a listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider, the addresses of that gateway will be created as A or CNAME records for that host in the appropriate zone file following the configuration outlined in the DNS Policy.

### Single Cluster Health Checks
If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will also be created and used to remove unhealthy IPs from the Zone file, should all health checks fail, then all A records will be published to avoid an NXDOMAIN response.

## Multiple Cluster

> In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret that specifies a unique `multiClusterID`, they should all reference the same zone(s) in the same DNS Provider for the same host. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

Reviewer 2: What would be the recommended approach for users to take to manage the setting of the multiClusterID across a large number of clusters? For example, if I had a multi-cluster architecture with 10+ clusters in the loop, having to manually set a multiClusterID value across each of these would be a lot of overhead?

Random thought - could a default multiClusterID value be automatically set based on some cluster metadata value that would be unique to that cluster? End users would then have the option to modify this afterwards if they so choose?

Author: The setting of a clusterID is also how the user signals to the DNS Operator that this zone is a distributed zone and should be interacted with differently. So we'd either need to change how that signal is sent to the operator, or require the user to set the clusterID. As the clusterID has no purpose in a single-cluster or OCM scenario, it made more sense to me, that this field is the signal that we are in a multi-cluster scenario.

Reviewer 3: Should we rely on ArgoCD to solve this? Isn't there a better way how to resolve this without Argo?

Reviewer: argocd is one way to do it. We wont be using argo it is just a way to solve this. Another way is to do it manually. I am sure you could do it with ansible etc (IE the setting of a multiclusterID is an exercise for the user and is somewhat dependant on their tooling)

Reviewer 4: how about leaving generation of clusterid on the (dns) operator? I think it would suffice to use some random uuid whose value space and proper RNG guarantee distinct values each time (widely used mechanism).

Reviewer 3: > The setting of a clusterID is also how the user signals to the DNS Operator that this zone is a distributed zone and should be interacted with differently. So we'd either need to change how that signal is sent to the operator, or require the user to set the clusterID. As the clusterID has no purpose in a single-cluster or OCM scenario, it made more sense to me, that this field is the signal that we are in a multi-cluster scenario.

I would prefer `mutlicluster: true` flag and to have ClusterID generated from metadata if possible, as that seems the easiest to use

Reviewer: This is an interesting idea. So remove the clusterid as a field that can be set and replace with just a boolean. The end user can still make a mistake though. If they set multi-cluster to true on one cluster and false on another and those clusters share a host, they will clash I believe

Author: ok, I see the value in this alternative. We generate the clusterID always, and the user simply sets multicluster to true/false.

This makes sense to me, I can update to function this way.

Reviewer 5: It seems odd to add this ID to the provider, it's not really anything to do with the provider, and you will have to add it it to every one you create. This ID should be unique to the controller instance, and probably something you can either set manually on controller init (startup flag) or if possible, something unique you can consistently generate on cluster, no?

Reviewer: If we are generating it, I think it can be at the controller level. Not sure if I see any value in allowing it to be set by the user at all now. We prob just need to figure out where we want to store it

Author: > It seems odd to add this ID to the provider, it's not really anything to do with the provider, and you will have to add it it to every one you create. This ID should be unique to the controller instance, and probably something you can either set manually on controller init (startup flag) or if possible, something unique you can consistently generate on cluster, no?

I went that way originally, and I think with this change to it being calculated somehow on the cluster and invisible to the user, it will likely return to that system.

Author: I think this also means we do not need to manage when the clusterID changes, which is nice as that was feeling like an area with complexity.

Author: Updated the RFC now.

> In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret that specifies a unique `multiClusterID`, they should all reference the same zone(s) in the same DNS Provider for the same host. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

Reviewer 3: What if multiple clusters choose the same `multiClusterID`?

Reviewer: This is bad configuration. I imagine you would end up with flapping DNS records (IE the value changing). Currently we don't have a way to spot this in the design. It could be difficult to as by design the clusters don't know about each other

Reviewer 3: > This is bad configuration. I imagine you would end up with flapping DNS records (IE the value changing). Currently we don't have a way to spot this in the design. It could be difficult to as by design the clusters don't know about each other

That is the issue, since the clusters are not aware of each other, it is really easy to make mistakes a have no way of knowing that it happened. I worry that this will haunt us in the future.

Reviewer: I think we can resolve this as discussed above we will use a multi-cluster flag and the controller will generate the id

> In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret that specifies a unique `multiClusterID`, they should all reference the same zone(s) in the same DNS Provider for the same host. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

Reviewer 5: Does "multiClusterID" make sense as a name? Maybe "clusterID" would be more appropriate?

Author: this field is not going to exist now, so resolving this comment.

### Multiple Cluster Health Checks
If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will be created on all clusters, there are then 2 types of health checks:
1) Local Health Checks - used to check the local gateway's IP addresses are responding for the expected host.
2) Remote Health Checks - used to check that the other IP addresses in the zone file are responding for that zones host.

When a local health check is failing, this IP will not be published to the zone. If it has already been published it will be removed only if there is more than one available address

> When a remote health check is failing a TXT record is added/amended in the zone to note the failure - should the percentage of failing clusters exceed the `MultiClusterFailureThreshold` (configured in the DNS Policy), that unhealthy IP is removed from the zone by any cluster with an unhealthy check on that IP.

Reviewer: could we expand on why a local check doesn't count towards this total failure number? The local check is using  the lb ip so will be going out and back in. It seems a reasonable check to count towards the failure number?

Author: When the local health check fails, it will immediately remove the bad IP, which means the health checks will be removed on remote clusters until the local cluster sees it is healthy and re-adds it.

Reviewer: hmm ok. I recall you mentioning that before. Does that sit well with the user experience? If I set a health check and say "remove the ip if >50% of health checks fail. Then only the local health check fails and it gets removed. This could be hard to reason about?

Author: yes, I see this, I suppose my thinking was that this keeps local health checks the same in both scenarios, but it does sound a little difficult to explain why some health checks work one way, and some another. I'll update this so they all work as if they are remote health checks.

Author: update RFC now.

- (optional) Create a gateway and workload which uses the same hosts as the single cluster.

## Migrating from single/multiple clusters to OCM

This is not covered.

## Cleanup

Cleanup of a cluster's zone file entries is triggered by deleting the DNS Policy that caused the DNS Records to be created.

The DNS policy will have a finalizer, when it is deleted the controller will mark the created DNS Records for deletion.

The DNS Records will have a finalizer from the DNS Operator which will clean the records from the zone before removing the finalizer.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## General Logic Overview

The general flow for in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a DNS Record which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS, or phrased more simply:
Build a DNS Record (let's refer to this as a kuadrantRecord) based on the local gateways and DNS Policy.

This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, where there are 2 possible routes:

> Where a multiClusterID is specified in the relevant ProviderSecret the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone as the authority and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are accurate. When cleaning up a DNS Record in this scenario the operator will ensure all records owned by the policy for the gateway on the local cluster are removed and then prune unresolvable records related to the hosts defined in the gateway from the DNS Provider zone.

Reviewer 4: I would vote for a more explicit option of enabling multicluster behavior. maybe something like `multiclusterenabled: true` for enabling and `multiclusterid: asdf` as a configuration parameter. The idea is to prevent accidental activation of multicluster behavior by setting multiclusterid. Also one advantage may also be that it leaves room for signaling of multicluster together with autodetermination of multiclusterid for example by the operator. WDYT?

Author: We have a few areas to think about this:
1) "accidental configuration": 
- accidentally setting single-cluster to multi-cluster is not much of a concern, main downside is a bit more traffic to the DNS Provider (really not much with only one cluster though)
- accidentally setting a multi-cluster cluster to single-cluster is quite a concern, the values of other clusters will be erased until this is corrected
2) with a flag as well as a clusterID we see the following scenarios:
- flag: true, clusterID absent: bad configuration, we'd need to prevent this happening somehow (webhook maybe?)
- flag: false, clusterID present: this is bad configuration, but less concerning, however the clusterID is doing nothing here.
- flag: true, clusterID present: good config for multi-cluster
- flag: false, clusterID absent: good config for single-cluster

I think this makes it clear that a flag is only really adding complexity to the configuration without adding any real value when we consider that the clusterID only needs to be non-empty when multi-cluster is active, there is no use-case for the clusterID in a single-cluster or OCM scenario.

I hope that makes my reasoning behind this decision more clear.

Reviewer: going to mark as resolved as we agreed on a flag and generating the id

Author: As above, we will not be exposing the clusterID to users now, so resolving this comment.

Where a multiClusterID is not specified the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Record as the authority and ensure the entire host is updated in the zone to exactly match the specified DNS Record when cleaning up in this scenario, the host is fully removed from the DNS Provider zone.

### API Updates
New configuration options in the providerSecret:
- `multiClusterID`

>   - When absent the DNS Operator will consider itself the owner of the zone and the local DNS Records as the authority.

Reviewer 3: What if only one cluster doesn't have `multiclusterID`, will he break it for the others?

Author: yes, as Craig mentioned above, this is bad configuration, and the cluster without the absent will act as the authority and remove all the other clusters records, until it is correctly configured.

Author: we will not be exposing this value to users now. Resolving this comment.

Reviewer 3: I would like to reopen this because I believe this will be a big usability problem and makes it very easy for one small issue to mess everything up. And whats worse it would be impossible to report this broken status back, meaning users won't know it is broken until they try it out.

Author: This field is going away, if see this comment tree: https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55#discussion_r1487460320

This is why I have closed this comment, I am rewriting the RFC to reflect this change.

I'm going to reclose this, but if you still have concerns after reading the above comments, then let's discuss it there to keep everything together.

>   - When absent the DNS Operator will consider itself the owner of the zone and the local DNS Records as the authority.

Reviewer 5: When you say "zone" here what do you mean: Hosted Zone? or should this be record set?

Author: I've used zone to refer to the DNS Provider zone, or the set of records in the DNS Provider for a specific host.

  - When present the DNS Operator will consider the zone the authority and only insert/update any missing records from the local DNS Records.
  - This value will be hashed whenever it is used in the zone file i.e. in the A/CNAME records and also in the health check TXT record)
  - Used when generating an A record, e.g. `<hash>-<multiClusterID>.<lb-id>.<host...>`

> - `RefreshInterval`

Author: In the scenario where all clusters are created at the same time, the usual time to consistency would be:
refreshInterval * 2.

Whenever a new cluster is introduced or removed, I would expect consistency - typically - in the same time-frame.

> - `RefreshInterval`

Reviewer 3: Is it assured to be in the time frame, or do we just expect that?

> - `RefreshInterval`

Author: no, in terms of worst case scenario, I don't have a definite number, though I still wouldn't expect it to be an enormous multiple of the `refreshInterval`value.

  - When absent it defaults to the shortest TTL of created records. This is how often in seconds to reconcile the DNS Policy in order to pull fresh zone values from the DNS Provider.

New fields added to the DNS Policy CRD: 
- `HealthCheck.MultiClusterFailureThreshold`
  - When absent defaults to `100`, what percentage of clusters need to be reporting an endpoint unhealthy on a remote IP for it to be removed from the zone by a cluster that does not own that IP.

New fields added to the DNS Record CRD:
- `HealthCheck`
  - Propagated from the DNS Policy, to facilitate reconciling health checks in the DNS controller.
- `ProviderSecret`

>   - Propagated from the DNS Policy to facilitate pulling the zone in the DNS controller.

Reviewer 5: This isn't new, and already part of this RFC  https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/blob/main/rfcs/0005-single-cluster-dnspolicy.md#dnsrecordspecproviderref

Author: ah, I thought it might be, good. I'll remove it from here.

### Changes to DNS Policy reconciler (kuadrant operator)

This will primarily need to be made aware of the new fields on the DNS Policy (Healthcheck block and providerSecret field) that it will need to propagate into any DNS Records that it creates or updates. Otherwise the logic of this controller remains largely the same.

### DNS Operator

A new component that will deal with taking the DNS Records output by the DNSPolicy reconciler and ensure they are accurately reflected in the DNS Provider zone.

This component should already exist, but in a fashion that assumes the DNS Record as the source of truth and always ensures that the zone matches the local DNS Record CR.

There are several changes required in this component:

#### Build DNS Records from the provider zone

> When the DNS Operator reconciles a DNS Record (kuadrantRecord) it will first look to the referenced providerSecret to see if a multiClusterID is set, if so the operator will first pull the most recent records from the DNS Provider and construct a separate DNS Record which accurately reflects the state of the zone in the provider (zoneRecord).

Reviewer: actually I see it is covered in more details at https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55/files#diff-9ae7541229e380e674061e35755fd39cd49ad04a31cb60608c3368a988e6fee3R141

If the DNS Operator already has zoneRecords it will first execute a GET request for the `kuadrant.last_modified_at` TXT record, if the value of that field is more recent than the zoneRecords lastModified time, then the DNS Operator will list and rebuild it's zoneRecords.

#### Ensure local records are accurate

Once the zoneRecord is created / updated on cluster, the operator will then scan through this DNS Record and remove any records that contain the local multiClusterID stored in the status of the DNS Record (more info on this later). Then inject the values from the kuadrantRecord into the zoneRecord. After this the DNS Operator will sanity check the result and prune any bad records (we will expand on that later). Once the zoneRecord is updated and sanity checked, if it has changed then the result is sent back to the DNS Provider so that the zone can be updated and made accurate (with an added update to the (`kuadrant.last_modified_at`) TXT record.

#### Update response to failing health check 

When a health check fails, there are 2 scenarios that need to be considered:

##### Local Health Check Failing

> In this scenario, the cluster will immediately remove the IP from the DNS Record unless it is the only remaining IP, as it is a local workload that is not functional.

Reviewer: Yeah so I am wondering if having two different behaviours for failing health checks provides enough value. What do we loose if the behaviour is consistent? IE the local check update the txt record also?

Author: agreed above, closing this one.

##### Remote Health Check Failing

> After ensuring its own hashed multiClusterID is present in the relevant TXT record, the controller will count the totalClusters which is the sum of unique multiClusterIDs in that hosts A records. Then it will count the reportingClusters which is the number of multiClusterIDs in the relevant TXT record, if the reportingClusters/totalClusters >= HealthCheck.MultiClusterFailureThreshold then this IP will be removed for this host.

Reviewer 3: Can two clusters do the removal at the same time thus failing the `MultiClusterFailureThreshold` constraint?

Author: although 2 clusters could try to remove a bad A/CNAME record at the same time, one will succeed and the other will fail (as the record no longer exists), the removal of bad IPs does not impact the `failureThreshold`.

Reviewer 3: is it possible for them to choose a different record?

Author: do you mean by mistake? Then no.

Once the DNS Record has been reconciled, there is a possibility that dead branches might exist due to health checks or clusters being removed, in this case the controller will need to work through the DNS Record and ensure that from hostname to A records is structurally sound and that any dead branches are removed.

An exception, as usual, is that if all records would be removed as the result of pruning then the DNS Record should be left unsaved, unless the DNS Record is trying to delete, in which case the records can be removed from the provider entirely.

#### Handle Adding/Changing multiClusterID

When a DNS Record is created, the cluster ID from the provider secret is set in the status of the DNS Record. If a current value exists and is different, then the records from the zone that used the existing value in the status are removed, the records created with a new multiClusterID are set, and the value in the status is updated.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

clean up in disaster scenario for multi-cluster:
- all clusters nuked
- more than `MultiClusterFailureThreshold` are nuked

API usage limits on DNS providers:

> - [Google](https://cloud.google.com/service-usage/docs/quotas) - 240 read requests per minute

Reviewer: can we add the update limits
